RESEARCH PAPER ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE &
ITS APPLICATIONS
Prof. Neha Saini
Assistant Professor in Department of Computer Science & IT
SDAM College Dinanagar
ABSTRACTIt is the science and engineering of making intelligent machines, especially intelligent computer programs. It is related to
the similar task of using computers to understand human intelligence, but AI does not have to confine itself to methods that
are biologically observable. While no consensual definition of Artificial Intelligence (AI) exists, AI is broadly characterized
as the study of computations that allow for perception, reason and action. Today, the amount of data that is generated, by
both humans and machines, far outpaces humans’ ability to absorb, interpret, and make complex decisions based on that data.
Artificial intelligence forms the basis for all computer learning and is the future of all complex decision making. This paper
examines features of artificial Intelligence, introduction, definitions of AI, history, applications, growth and achievements.
KEYWORDS- machine learning,deep learning,neural networks,Natural Language Processing and Knowledge Base System
 INTRODUCTIONArtificial Intelligence ( AI ) is the branch of computer science which deals with intelligence of machines where an intelligent agent
is a system that takes actions which maximize its chances of success. It is the study of ideas which enable computers to do the things
that make people seem intelligent. The central principles of AI include such as reasoning, knowledge, planning, learning,
communication, perception and the ability to move and manipulate objects. It is the science and engineering of making intelligent
machines, especially intelligent computer programs
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE METHODS:
Machine LearningIt is one of the applications of AI where machines are not explicitly programmed to perform certain tasks; rather, they learn and
improve from experience automatically. Deep Learning is a subset of machine learning based on artificial neural networks for
predictive analysis. There are various machine learning algorithms, such as Unsupervised Learning, Supervised Learning, and
Reinforcement Learning. In Unsupervised Learning, the algorithm does not use classified information to act on it without any
guidance. In Supervised Learning, it deduces a function from the training data, which consists of a set of an input object and the
desired output. Reinforcement learning is used by machines to take suitable actions to increase the reward to find the best possibility
which should be taken in to account.
Natural Language Processing(NLP)
It is the interactions between computers and human language where the computers are programmed to process natural languages.
Machine Learning is a reliable technology for Natural Language Processing to obtain meaning from human languages. In NLP, the
audio of a human talk is captured by the machine. Then the audio to text conversation occurs, and then the text is processed where
the data is converted into audio. Then the machine uses the audio to respond to humans. Applications of Natural Language
Processing can be found in IVR (Interactive Voice Response) applications used in call centres, language translation applications
like Google Translate and word processors such as Microsoft Word to check the accuracy of grammar in text. However, the nature
of human languages makes the Natural Language Processing difficult because of the rules which are involved in the passing of
information using natural language, and they are not easy for the computers to understand. So NLP uses algorithms to recognize
and abstract the rules of the natural languages where the unstructured data from the human languages can be converted to a format
that is understood by the computer.
